I will now do this, so I'm gonna go like
this, git cat-file-p and print it out.
Look at this, it has a tree,
what's a tree?
It has the author, it has the committer,
it has the time, it has 600 on it.
It has my friendly message
involved right here.
Where's our commit though?
This doesn't tell me anything.
So, there's another sha here, so
I'm just gonna grab that sha.
Whoopsies, and I'm gonna just put it in.
Look at this.
Again, something that looks
like file permissions,
blob, another sha, and look at that.
The name of the file we
just got done adding.
So it kind of looks like we can
kind of walk through git, and
we can find the file that is stored.
So I'm gonna go here now, and
I'm gonna do the exact same thing.
I'm going to print out that and
look at that, hello friend and masters.
I was able to go all the way down and
drill to the exact point of the change
we've made by starting with the git shot.
This is very, very important.
Now, there's some really good key
terms here that you need to know.
First off,
you'll notice that there's a tree, right?
You see the term tree being printout.
The easiest way to think about tree is,
a tree is a directory.
It contains a set of files or
more directories.
A blob, what you saw right here is a file.
And so that's the kind of the mentality
you should have if you ever look or
peruse through these commits.
And we will actually use
this information later and
restore stuff that we've lost by
knowing this kind of information.
So anyways, there we go.
We were able to go all
the way down to the bottom.
So that means our sha contained a tree.
And that tree contained our file.
And that file contained
the entirety of that file,
not just our changes, but
the entirety of the file.
So here we go.
Very key concepts.
Make sure you know that.
Big takeaway, git does not store diffs and
we're gonna prove that,
it stores the entirety of stuff.
And so, I want you to just take a moment,
and remember this sha maybe
by the first couple characters,
mine's EC3, you just remember yours.
This is the sha to the file.
This is a very important part right here,
all right?
So, we're gonna do something else.
I want you to create a second file and
I want you to commit it, and
call it second.md.
Whatever text you want,
just create something.
So I'll do the exact same thing.
All right, fantastic.
Hopefully everyone mostly got that done.
Just make it a quick, easy change.
By the way, if you're using some
sort of command line utility, or
you're using your editor if you're using
VS Code or Vim, don't use the git client.
Right now,
we're gonna stay all in the command line.
I want you to be there for a reason,
because you wanted to understand
what's actually happening.
Because when you use something
like Fugitive for Vim,
it's literally just translating your
actions into these command line arguments.
So I just want you to understand
what's happening here.
All right, explore your new commit.
What can you say about
first.md in your new commit?
Cause we didn't touch first.md, did we?
We didn't, we just simply added
a new file and then committed it.
So, can you find first.md
in your new commit?
By the way, a little fun fact you get
the first seven characters right here
whenever you commit.
You can actually copy that and go git cat
file- p, throw that in there, all right?
Notice something a little different here.
We have a tree.
Again, remember, this is your folder,
but we also have a parent.
And notice that that is
the sha from my first commit.
It will be the sha from your first commit.
You can start seeing how
this graph is being born.
Your first one doesn't have the parents,
the next one does,
and from here on out they'll all
have parents or multiple parents.
Second, let's take this tree,
and I'm gonna cat this out.
Get cat, there we go.
Now look at that.
I actually have out.
I actually committed out.
Remember when I showed you the log, I
actually didn't look at what I was doing,
I actually commit that out.
The mistakes were made.
But either way, you see this right here.
You see that I have both my first and
now my second.
But remember this very important part.
Look at what first is.
It's the same sha that it
had in the previous commit,
meaning our commits store pointers
to the entire contents of that file.
So we did not update first, therefore,
this next commit contains first, but
it contains a pointer
to the exact version.
That means at any point in time, you only
need one commit to rebuild your repo.
You can completely rebuild everything
about it, because that is how it works.
Is that every single commit stores the
entirety of the state, not a differential.
This is a very important point about git,
because it just helps you
understand git fundamentally.
An so, as you use merge and
rebase and all these other commands,
it's just good to know this.
Does this generally make sense?
Even if you don't understand
how the compression works?
How does it look up stuff?
Do you at least understand
that git stores these files,
stores them as a bunch of these
really long strings of characters?
And as long strings of characters contain
every last change of your repo, question.
>> So the first two characters
of commits sha is then
placed where those blobs are for
each file so
that that points to the commit
that it was last updated in?
>> Effectively, yes and so you can see
right here, if I look at that, EC.
If I go ls git/objects, you'll see EC.
So you actually see that it
literally a storing each thing, and
then it builds it up.
Every tree contains effectively one or
more blob is the way to look at it.
That's why you can't
commit an empty folder.
Have you ever created a folder and
then nothing shows up?
That's why,
because the tree has to have something.
>> And Richard says,
is this like a linked list?
>> That's a good way to think about it.
It's like a linked list.
The problem about a linked list thought is
that a linked list contains a node
that points to the next node.
But git,
you can have more than one parent.
It's an acyclic graph that
happens to be linear.
It's probably the best way to look at.
It is that there isn't an ironic
order to get which is time, right?
So as time marches forward,
every commit you make is ordered that way.
That's actually an extremely important
point to make sure you have in your head,
cuz when we do bisecting time is
a very important aspects to it and
why bisecting works very, very well.
And if you've never used I'm very sorry
if you've ever had to find when a bug
happened and
you didn't know that this tool exists.
So we'll go over it.
Hopefully this does make git
feel less magical though.
I want git to feel magical,
because it works so well,
not because it's mysterious.
And that's where you want magic to happen.
You want it to be a great product,
not mysterious that it actually works.
Sometimes it's mysterious that it actually
works 'cause you programmed it and
you're shocked that you can
build anything that big.
That's a different story.
The previous chief product
officer at Netflix said,
I'm surprised Netflix even works at all,
right?
Because at the end of the day, it's
a whole bunch of people building something
and somehow it all works together.
So it's always fantastic.
Remember, every single program you'll ever
write can be broken down to a bunch of if
statements, for loops,
and variable declarations.
That's it, that's all you're doing.
Really, if you really break it down,
it's just a bunch of go-to statements and
procedural code.
That's all you write.
And so no matter how fancy, no matter
how much elixir you use, it's all just
really simple go-to statements at
the end of the day, all right?
This is just for you guys.
I'm gonna do a little
quick thing right here.
I'm going to go like this.
Make dir, how about source?
Get status, get status.
You'll notice nothing shows up.
I'm gonna go Vim source and
we're gonna create a file in here.
How about index.js?
For all my TS, we're just so
awesome, right?
All right, okay,
I'm gonna have an empty file in there.
Git status,
you'll see that it's right there.
Git out of this,
git status git commit foo.
I'll do foo again.
And I have this right here.
And I'm gonna go git cat file -p,
and print it out.
Again, parent previous commit, tree.
I'm gonna go into the tree,
get cat file -p tree.
Look at this, we got our blobs.
But there you go, another tree right
here and that tree is a folder.
So that means if I take this tree and
go get cat file,
that tree you'll see index.ts.
It's literally just storing a bunch of
pointers describing the state of git,
just really to drive that home.
Just so everyone really understands,
you could probably
build a command line tool that cats out
a commit, parses out these strings.
And you could probably rebuild the repo
yourself just from knowing how to use git
cat-file.
You could actually rebuild the entire
state of it by just walking blobs and
trees and making directories.
It's really not that magic,
just feels magic.